# GeospatialGhana

This project is supplemental to the research article "Geospatial determinants of maternal and child exposure to fine particulate matter in Kintampo, Ghana: Levels within the household and community, by surrounding building density and near roadways"

Included is code used to develop community boundaries and examples of estimating surrounding building density and nearby roadways using a simulated GPS trajectory. 

ABSTRACT
Background. Background. Personal exposure to fine particulate matter (PM2.5) from household air pollution is well-documented in sub-Saharan Africa, but spatial patterns of exposure are poorly characterized. 
Objective. We evaluated personal PM2.5 exposure that occurred in the household vicinity or community, and during typical hours of cooking among mothers and children living in rural communities of Ghana. We also explored the influence of building density and roadways. 
Methods. Our study included 259 sessions of geolocated, gravimetrically-calibrated one-minute personal PM2.5 measurements from participants in the GRAPHS Child Lung Function Study. The household vicinity was defined using a 50-meter buffer around participants’ homes. Community boundaries were developed using a spatial clustering algorithm applied to an open-source dataset of building footprints in Africa. For each GPS location, we estimated building density (500m buffer) and proximity to roadways (100m buffer). We estimated differences in PM2.5 exposure by location (household, community), time of day (morning/evening cooking hours, night), building density, and proximity to roadways using linear mixed effect models. 
Results. Relative to nighttime household exposure, PM2.5 exposure during evening cooking hours was 2.84 (95%CI=2.70-2.98) and 1.80 (95%CI=1.54-2.10) times higher in the household and community, respectively. Exposures were elevated in areas with the highest versus lowest quartile of building density (FactorQ1vsQ4=1.60, 95%CI=1.42-1.80). The effect of building density was strongest during evening cooking hours, and influenced levels in both the household and community (31% and 65% relative increase from Q1 to Q4, respectively). Being proximal to a trunk, tertiary or track roadway increased exposure by a factor of 1.16 (95%CI=1.07-1.25), 1.68 (95%CI=1.45-1.95) and 1.27 (95%CI=1.06-1.53), respectively.
Significance. Our findings suggest that community-wide solid fuel use for household cooking contributes to personal PM2.5 exposure. Building density may exacerbate community exposures when multiple households are cooking simultaneously. Proximity to large roadways (trunk) and unpaved roadways (tertiary, track) increase PM2.5 exposure.  

